Short overview
China-MORE is a bottom-up long-term multi-sector multi-GHG emission reduction evaluation model based on the VEDA-TIMES model platform for energy system optimization. The China-MORE model adopts the principle of system analysis and takes the energy system optimization module as the core. It combines the modules of energy service demand, multi-greenhouse gas emission, air pollutants emission, power technology diffusion, emission space allocation and uncertainty analysis. 
The core modules of the model are energy system optimization module and greenhouse gas emission module. Firstly, the energy service demand module provides the service demand of industry, construction, transportation, agriculture, waste treatment and other sectors according to the social and economic development factors. The model energy system optimization module can obtain the fuel combination and technology composition with minimum cost according to the given demand level. At the same time, pollutant emission module and GHG (CO2 excluded) emission module output emission data of different scenarios. On this basis, the model can estimate the medium - and long-term optimal emission path accordingly.

Key features
Taking 2015 and 2020 as the double base years, the current technological status of the energy extraction, energy processing and conversion, industrial, transportation, residential and other end-use energy consumption processes in the whole energy system of China is carefully portrayed.
Through extensive literature research, the economic and technical parameters of CO2 and GHG emission reduction technologies in energy extraction, processing and conversion sectors and end-use sectors such as agriculture, industry, construction and transportation are carefully portrayed in the model, and a carbon neutral emission reduction technology database is established to build a data base for research and analysis of carbon neutral pathways in China.
Construct a power supply and demand module to simulate the future energy storage and peaking demand of large-scale deployment of renewable energy by portraying the power output curve and power demand curve of wind and other renewable energy sources.
Based on the data base of CHINA-MORE model, we build a module for non-CO2 greenhouse gas emissions such as methane, nitrous oxide, and fluorinated gases, and update the simulation of non-CO2 greenhouse gas emission mechanisms based on the latest literature to expand the CO2 greenhouse gas emission reduction technology library and establish a multi-greenhouse gas emission reduction Optimization module.
Establish an uncertainty analysis module to facilitate the analysis of the impact of key parameters of key technologies on the achievement of climate policy goals.
Socioeconomic dimensions
The general socioeconomic parameters, including GDP growth rate, population, urbanisation rate, and industry structure, are exogenous. The current socioeconomic modelling assumption is consistent with the shared socio-economic scenario (SSP2). In the TIMES modelling framework, the economic, population and sectoral growths are used to determine specific drivers for the growth in energy demands in reference scenarios with no climate change mitigation policy. For example, the demand for the number of billion kilometre-vehicles (BVkm) travelled by automobiles is based on GDP per capita, whereas the growth in the demand for residential space heating is driven by the number of households. Once the drivers for the different energy demands represented by NATEM are determined and quantified, the construction of the reference demand scenario requires computing a set of energy service demands over the horizon. This is done by choosing elasticities of demands to their respective drivers.

Mitigation/adaptation measures and technologies
China is on the critical stage of its energy transformation reform and meeting its NDC target for 2030. As a technology-rich model, and like other bottom-up models, mitigation/adaptation measures and technologies can be reflected by constraints for commodities and processes. Referring to the “five-year plan” series, detailed emission standard and mitigation technologies are reported for each sector, especially for final demand sectors. Demand for end-use energy services is the basis of analysis of the bottom-up energy model. Useful energy provided by end-use energy equipment satisfying demand for end-use energy for the current year is a prerequisite for analysis of energy system optimisation. The demand for end-use energy services pertaining to the Chinese regional model is classified into four major sectors, namely the industrial sector, the transportation sector, the building sector (commercial/residential sector), and the agricultural sector and others, according to segments.

Economic rationale and model solution
TIMES is a dynamic least-cost optimisation model, and as such contains three components: an objective function, variables, and constraints. The first component (objective) corresponds to minimising the net total discounted cost (e.g. 3-5% is typically used in deep decarbonisation studies) of the entire energy system. A single optimisation, which searches for the maximal net total surplus, simulates market equilibrium for each commodity (energy, material, demand). Maximising the net total surplus (i.e. the sum of producers’ and consumers’ surpluses) is operationally done by minimising the net total cost of the energy system. The second component (variables) corresponds mainly to future investments and activities of technologies at each time period, amount of energy produced or consumed by technologies, as well as energy imports and exports. An additional output of the model is the implicit price (shadow price) of each energy form, material and emission, as well as the reduced cost of each technology (reduction required to make a technology competitive). The third component (constraints) corresponds to various limits (e.g. amount of energy resources available) and obligations (e.g. energy balances throughout the system, useful energy demand satisfaction) to be respected.
The main model assumptions leading to optimal outputs include future technological developments and the structure of energy markets. On the one hand, technological progress is exogenously assumed, and economic agents have a perfect foresight of this. On the other hand, energy markets are assumed to be under perfect competition. Moreover, TIMES considers only energy markets, and thus equilibrium is not assumed for all markets in the economy. From that perspective, TIMES computes only a partial equilibrium on energy markets.

Key parameters
Technical parameters: efficiency, availability factor, lifetime, stock for base year, etc.
Economic parameters: investment cost, operation fixed cost, variable cost, fuel cost, etc.
Emission parameters: emission coefficient for fuels and for specific technologies.
Policy parameters: new technology for starting year, new investment for technologies, technology share constraints, emission constraints, carbon tax, etc.
Key policies that can be addressed
Through different scenario combination design, the problems of China's energy consumption, GHG emission and emission reduction cost are studied.
China-MORE model provides an important research tool for China's medium and long-term low emission development strategy, and also helps to analyze the gap between China's current emission reduction efforts and the goal of carbon neutrality.
Explore ways to achieve carbon neutrality at lower system cost by using multi-GHG joint emission reduction strategies.
