Short overview
The Climate, Land, Energy, Water systems (CLEWs) framework is an integrated resource modelling framework that is being used to assess the different interlinkages between sectors and how policies made in these individual sectors would impact the others. The framework utilizes the open source modelling tool OseMOSYS which is a least cost optimization tool that focuses on long term energy modelling. By using the OseMOSYS tool we are able to model the investment needs for policies in not just the energy sector but as well as land and water sectors. And in turn we can see the impact of these policies on sustainability and development. The Kenya CLEWS model developed using OseMOSYS covers a time domain from 2020 to 2050. It also models the two day types- day and night. There are 4 seasons represented, 2 dry seasons and 2 wet seasons which makes for a total of 8 timeslices. In the energy sector 6 powerplants are covered for electricity production including; geothermal, hydro, solar pv, wind, biomass and light fuel imports. Diesel imports are also covered for agricultural mechanization as well as transport uses. The land sector is divided into 6 subsectors including; cropland, forests, built-up land, waterbodies, and other land uses. Croplnad is further represented by 5 main crops; maize, beans, tea, sorghum and cowpeas which are represented for rainfed and irrigated areas for high and low seasons. Built-up land accounts for both urbanization as well as land used for energy powerplants. Water bodies represents both groundwater recharge as well as surfcae water, and other land uses accounts for grassland, shrubland, wetlands and barren lands. The emissions are represented as CO2 equivalents. The model then represents all these interlinkages on the basis of their costs and resource availability. The model then optimizes based on least net cost across all sectors while still meeting demand. 

Key features
Fully open source, from solver to code, to pre- and post-processing codes, to interfaces, to data. Teaching material and documentation available on GitHub and on the Open University's OpenLearn platform. 

Climate module & emissions granularity
The model currently represents carbon emissions for different sectors as well as by source. 

Socioeconomic dimensions
Minimal representation of socioeconomic impacts of climate change including access of water for public use, climate impacts on crop yields, as well as investment costs for energy expansion.

Mitigation/adaptation measures and technologies
The Kenya CLEWs model represents both Mitigation and adaptation scenarios. The climate mitigation scenario involves the electrification of agricultural mechanization and transitioning from the current use of diesel for such purposes. Whereas the adaptation and resilience scenario focuses on restration of forests by curbing the use of traditional biomass. 

Economic rationale and model solution
The model computes dynamically (year-by-year over the whole time domain) the investment and operation mix across the energy, land use and water sectors that minimizes the Net Present Cost of all sectors together while meeting commodity demands and other user-definedconstraints. The rationale is the same as for any energy system optimization model, but here land and water are included.

Key parameters
Key inputs are: 

commodity demands for the energy sector, as well as the agricultural sector (crops) and the water sector (water demands for public uses and energy);
techno-economic characteristics of energy supply technologies;
commodity import prices (fuels, crops, water);
detailed costs of crop production per crop and per mechanization level;
geospatial information of land covers and agricultural land uses in the base year;
geospatial information on precipitation, evapotranspiration, surface water run off and groundwater recharge for the base year and for various climate scenarios;
Key policies that can be addressed
Energy and climate policies (e.g. renewable targets, emission targets, emission penalties, targets of production of energy commodities or carriers such as hydrogen), agricultural policies (e.g. food security targets aiming at capping crop imports, incentives to domestic crop production, targets of increased water efficiency, targets of modernization of agricultural practices).

Implications for SDGs
Focuses on SDGs 2, 6, 7, 9, 11, 13 and 15.

Recent use cases
Recent use case table	Paper DOI	Paper Title	Key findings
Recent use case #1	NA	NA	
Focuses on transitioning of agricultural mechanization from diesel use through electrification of aforemntioned mechanization. While this reduces the dependency on fossil fuels there is a need for further investment in solar and wind to meet new energy demands. This transition however has a positive impact on carbon emiissions by reducing the emissions by more than 50 %.
Recent use case #2	NA	NA	
This use case focuses on transitioning from the use of traditional biomass to reduce deforestation. This will reduce the impacts of climate change by reducing the amount of evapotranspiration and by also reducing carbon emissions.
