Short overview
The Climate, Land, Energy, Water systems (CLEWs) methodology is a model-based methodology to assess costs and benefits of policy and investment decisions made in one sector (e.g. land use) on the other sectors (e.g. water supply). These case studies use the Open Source Modelling Tool (OSeMOSYS), a technologically-detailed techno-economic optimisation tool, which enabled to create a techno-economic representation of the climate, land, energy and water systems, where the parts of these systems are represented as a number of processes with certain transfer functions and exchanging between them different commodities. For example, one particular agricultural land use is represented as a ‘box’ that takes a certain quantity of water, energy and land area as inputs and delivers part of the water (through ground water recharge or surface run off) and a crop with a certain yields. In this way, the total land use of the region can be represented through many such ‘boxes’ in parallel, with different inputs and different yields, and a competition between these uses can be created, on the basis of their costs and the resource availability. The optimisation seeks to minimise the Net Present Value of all costs incurred across the water, energy and land sectors in the whole time domain analysed (typically, of several decades), while meeting an increasing demand for commodities (e.g. food products) and resource availability constraints. 
The time domain goes from 2020 up to 2050. For a good time resolution have been considered 4 seasons 2 day-types (day/night), getting a total of 8 time-slices in order to capture the renewable supply variability but without making the computation incredibly heavy. The energy sector rapresents the fuels imported (coal, gasoline and diesel) or locally extracted (for the geothermal and biofuel and waste supply) that are needed as an input for the power plants and domestic demand (e.g for transport, industrial and residential use). Then, for the electricity production, the conversion technologies are represented separatelly and convert the input (fuel used) into electricity which is then taken by the transmission system in order to meet the final electric demand.  The scale is national and represents Ethiopia as a whole. Also the emissions are represented as CO2 equivalent (hence considering, a part from CO2, also CH4 and NO2) for each fossil fuel, input as Mton/PJ being linearly dependent on generation. The land system model represents the total land which is then divided into built-up land, forest, grassland, barren land, water bodies, other (e.g. natural reserves), pastures and crops. Each crop is again divided in 5 categories of land uses, depending on the type of inputs: irrigated land with intermediate or high input (in terms of fertilizers, chemicals, mechanization and energy) and rainfed land with low, intermediate and high input. Each of these types will have different yields and they compete between themselves in the model, based on cost- and resource-optimality criteria. Finally, land uses are also divided in clusters, which aggregate cells of the region with similar agro-climatic conditions. All this categorization and all input data is derived from the FAOSTAT database. Emissions from land use changes are represented, following the standards defined by IPCC for emissions accounting and comparing the environmental impact under four different scenarios: business as usual (BAU), Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) and two with climate change impacts (BAU-CC and NDC-CC). The water system represents precipitation, all water inputs and outputs of land uses, and all final water demands / uses. Precipitation, evaporation from water bodies and evapotranspiration from vegetation are represented and vary according to climatic conditions and climate change. Groundwater and surface water uses are represented separately. For the climate change scenarios, has been considered a variation in the precipitation that would affect the hydropower capacity factor and crops yields. Finally,  the energy, water and land systems are interlinked, for instance water used by power plants, diesel used by agricultural activities and water used by irrigation.

Key features
Fully open source, from solver to code, to pre- and post-processing codes, to interfaces, to data. Teaching material and documentation available on GitHub and on the Open University's OpenLearn platform. 

Mitigation/adaptation measures and technologies
With the CLEWs methodology it is possible to represent any kind of scenario a part from the business as usual (BAU). For this case study, three additional scenarios have been developed as described in the "short overview" section: NDC, NDC-CC and BAU-CC.  In all of them it is possible to consider emission constraints together with specific targets set for preventing a 1.5 degrees C temperature increase. For instance, in the NDC, the specific targets refer to a reforestation of 3 million ha by 2030, adoption of sustainable land managment practices, improve water use efficiency in irrigation, and increase the renewable share for the electricity generation by 2040 (55% hydropower and 45% of other sources). On the other hand, the other two scenarios (BAU-CC and NDC-CC) are even more climate change oriented, since they consider the effect of precipitation change and water scarcity on the hydropower capacity factor and crop yields.  

Economic rationale and model solution
The model computes dynamically (year-by-year over the whole time domain) the investment and operation mix across the energy, land use and water sectors that minimizes the Net Present Cost of all sectors together while meeting commodity demands and other user-definedconstraints. The rationale is the same as for any energy system optimization model, but here land and water are included.

Key parameters
Key inputs are:

commodity demands for the energy sector, as well as the agricultural sector (crop and livestock products) and the water sector (water demands for public uses, industry, residential and energy);
techno-economic characteristics of energy supply technologies;
commodity import prices (fuels, crops, water);
detailed costs of crop production per crop and per mechanization level;
geospatial information of land covers and agricultural land uses in the base year;
geospatial information on precipitation, evapotranspiration, surface water run off and groundwater recharge for the base year and for various climate scenarios;
Key policies that can be addressed
Energy and climate policies (e.g. renewable targets, emission targets, emission penalties, targets of production of energy commodities or carriers such as hydrogen)
Agricultural policies (e.g. food security targets aiming at capping crop imports, incentives to domestic crop production, targets of increased water efficiency, targets of modernization of agricultural practices).
Implications for SDGs
Focuses on SDGs 6,7,9, 11, 13 and 15.

Recent use cases
 

Recent use case table	Paper DOI	Paper Title	Key findings
Recent use case #1	10.1007/s42108-021-00119-3	Long-term water–energy–food security and resources sustainability: a case study of Ethiopia by 2030 and 2050	The dominant hydropower energy capacity will be limited after 2040 and replaced by solar and other technologies. The target food production is constrained by limited land availability and productivity. Doubling of agricultural productivity is needed to effectively reduce the burden on land encroachment to sensitive ecosystems and reduce the dependency on imported food. It can be cautiously concluded that from resources supply–demand aspects, Ethiopia achieves middle-income country status by developing its untapped water and land resources. 
Recent use case #2	NA	NA	Addressing water crisis and dying ecosystems in the Urmia and Hamoon basins (Iran) with an integrated planning perspective. Results of the CLEWs modelling show that there is not enough water to feed the restoration of the lakes as well as water demands for public uses and agriculture in the following years. The water deficit can be significantly aggravated by climatic change, which is particularly fast and intense in the two regions. The water deficit can be reduced by change in agricultural practices and import/export patterns with the rest of the country.
Recent use case #3	10.3390/w11091805	The Impact of Climate Change on Crop Production in Uganda—An Integrated Systems Assessment with Water and Energy Implications	Results, developed at a catchment level, indicate that on average there could be an 11% reduction and 8% increase in rain-fed crop production in the cumulatively driest and wettest climates, respectively. Furthermore, in the identified driest climate, the electricity required for pumping water is expected to increase by 12% on average compared to the base scenario.
DOI Badge

DOI Badge

References (APA)
Howells, M., Hermann, S., Welsch, M., Bazilian, M., Segerstr?m, R., Alfstad, T., ... & Ramma, I. (2013). Integrated analysis of climate change, land-use, energy and water strategies. Nature Climate Change, 3(7), 621-626.

Ramos, E. P., Howells, M., Sridharan, V., Engstr?m, R. E., Taliotis, C., Mentis, D., ... & Rogner, H. (2021). The climate, land, energy, and water systems (CLEWs) framework: a retrospective of activities and advances to 2019. Environmental Research Letters, 16(3), 033003.

Ramos, E. P., Sridharan, V., Alfstad, T., Niet, T., Shivakumar, A., Howells, M. I., ... & Gardumi, F. (2022). Climate, Land, Energy and Water systems interactions–From key concepts to model implementation with OSeMOSYS. Environmental Science & Policy, 136, 696-716.
