Short description
The climate credit risk model (CLIMACRED) for climate scenario-contingent valuationsimulates the impact of different climate scenarios on the evolution of the balance-sheet of a firm and thus on its credit risk and the value of the assets it issues.

The model  combines (i) firm-level technological and geoloocation data, (ii) climate impact models for transition and physcial risks, and (iii) scenario-contingent
financial valuation models to deliver scenario-contingent valuation of physical and transition risks at the asset and portfolio levels. It provides the following risk-metrics:  

Firms’ output/revenue trajectories conditioned to climate scenarios (e.g. NGFS)
Climate-scenarios adjusted default probability (PD) and loss given default (LGD)
Climate-scenarios adjusted financial valuation of firm’s contracts (equity, bonds)
Climate-scenarios adjusted financial valuation of sovereign risks (bonds, policy
rates)
Climate-scenarios adjusted risk measures (e.g. Climate VaR, ES)
Key features
Scenario-contingent valuation, Credit risk model, Value at Risk

Socioeconomic dimensions
Financial Valuation, Credit Risk, Value at Risk

Economic rationale and model solution
To mitigate potential systemic risk induced by an allocation of financial assets inconsistent with climate change impacts and mitigation, one needs to  factor in transition and physical risks in financial-asset valuation.

Key parameters
Climate scenario, baseline probability of default, baseline loss-given-default, debt to capital ratio, divident rate, return on capital, depreciation rate, debt maturity

Key policies that can be addressed
Financial stability, systemic risk

Implications for SDGs
Contribute to align capital allocation with climate action 

Use cases
Publication Reference	Abstract
Mandel, A., Battiston, S., & Monasterolo, I. (2025). Mapping global financial risks under climate change. Nature Climate Change, 1-6. https://www.nature.com/articles/nclimate3255

There is growing concern about the potential impacts of climate change on financial stability but little quantitative evidence available on the potential magnitude of financial risks induced by climate extremes. Here we provide a forward-looking assessment of the impacts of floods, storms, and wildfires on a universe of securities representative of global market capitalization, using the structural climate credit-risk model CLIMACRED-PHYS. We show that there can be a substantial amplification of direct economic losses arising from firms’ financial leverage. We highlight the importance of cross-border climate financial risks, notably the transfer of impacts from production facilities in emerging economies to firms in developed economies. Finally, we quantify the potential increase of financial risks induced by climate change. Overall, our results emphasize the relevance of asset-level climate risk assessment for financial regulation and the importance of integrating financial impacts in the assessment of adaptation policies.
Battiston, S., Mandel, A., Monasterolo, I., & Roncoroni, A. (2023). Climate credit risk and corporate valuation. Available at SSRN, 4124002.DOI Badge	We analyse the level of potential carbon risk implied by alternative future climate policy sce- narios. To this end, we develop a novel climate credit risk model (CLIMACRED) for climate scenario-contingent valuation, linking the firm’s default probability to the climate scenarios developed by financial authorities. Transition risk emerges from changes in markets’ expectations about the materialization of climate transition scenarios, which lead to adjustments in the firms’ default probability and in the value of their corporate bonds. We derive closed-form expressions for the ad- justments in firms’ default probability considering asset-level technology, and for the value of issued bonds and equities. Our results show that valuation adjustments vary greatly with the severity of adjustments in market expectations, decarbonization scenarios and the energy technology composition of the firms’ revenues. Losses in equity values can range up to 80% for firms focusing on fossil fuel activities, but can be much lower for firms with diversified energy technology profiles.
Monetary Authority of Singapore. (2023). Special Feature 1: Assessing the Impact of Climate Transition Risk on the Financial System. In Financial Stability Review 2023 (pp. 45-60). Monetary Authority of Singapore. https://www.mas.gov.sg/-/media/mas-media-library/publications/financial-stability-review/2023/financial-stability-review-2023.pdf	To limit global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius, the global economy will have to undergo a rapid and systemwide transformation towards decarbonisation and achieve net zero carbon emissions by around 2050. Global Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions would need to peak before 2025, and decline at least 43% by 2030 relative to 2019 levels to reach this crucial target (IPCC, 2023). Overshooting 1.5 degrees Celsius will likely lead to far more severe and, at times, irreversible impacts on natural ecosystems and the economy. Against this backdrop of intensifying climate physical and transition risks, many central banks and financial regulators, with the participation of FIs, have conducted climate scenario analyses to better understand the implications of climate change on financial stability. Similarly, MAS conducted a climate scenario analysis exercise in 2022 for key banks and insurers and published its findings in the 2022 FSR (MAS, 2022)
References
Mandel, A., Battiston, S., & Monasterolo, I. (2025). Mapping global financial risks under climate change. Nature Climate Change, 1-6.
Battiston, S., Mandel, A., Monasterolo, I., & Roncoroni, A. (2023). Climate credit risk and corporate valuation. Available at SSRN, 4124002.
Battiston, S., Mandel, A., Monasterolo, I., Sch?tze, F., & Visentin, G. (2017). A climate stress-test of the financial system. Nature Climate Change, 7(4), 283-288.
