Short overview
The GEM-E3 model is a multi-regional, multi-sectoral, recursive dynamic computable general equilibrium (CGE) model which provides details on the macro-economy and its interaction with the environment and the energy system. It is an empirical, large scale model, written entirely in structural form. GEM-E3 allows for a consistent comparative analysis of policy scenarios since it ensures that in all scenarios, the economic system remains in general equilibrium. In addition, it incorporates micro-economic mechanisms and institutional features within a consistent macro-economic framework and avoids the representation of behaviour in reduced form. Particularly valuable are the insights the model provides regarding the distributional aspects of long-term structural adjustments. The GEM-E3 model is extensively used as a tool of policy analysis and impact assessment.

The GEM-E3 model is a sophisticated economic model that is used to analyze economic, climate and energy policies and assess their impacts. It is primarily designed to provide users with a tool to evaluate the effects of policy changes on the economy and the environment. The model has a global coverage (46 countries regions) where the G-20 countries, and the countries that are major equipment manufacturers or energy exporters are represented individually.  All countries are linked through trade transactions.

Gem E3 Diagram 1

The GEM-E3 model is based on a number of different components that represent various aspects of the economy. These components include the household sector, the business sector, the government sector, and the international/external sector. Each of these components is further divided into sub-components that capture the complexities of the different sectors of the economy. The household sector includes all households in the economy and their consumption and savings behavior. The business sector includes all firms in the economy characterized by their production capacities and investment behavior. The government sector includes all levels of government and their spending and revenue-raising behavior. The international sector includes all international trade flows and capital flows. 

The GEM-E3 model uses mathematical equations to represent the behavior of these different components and how do they interact with each other. The model’s mathematical formulation is based on economic theory and established empirical relationships. The model is calibrated to represent the specific characteristics of the economy being analyzed. The model is calibrated in a base year that it is fully reproduced - the solution of the model matches the observed data in the base year. The empirical relationships (e.g. labor supply curve) are updated with the most recent empirical findings One of the key strengths of the GEM-E3 model is its ability to simulate and quantify the effects of alternative policies. For instance, it can be used to simulate the impact of changes in taxation, carbon pricing, trade policies, environmental regulations, or infrastructure investments on the economy and the environment. 

Gem E3 Diagram 3

The global coverage of GEM-E3 model allows to analyze the impacts of policies across different regions or countries. It can be used to analyze the impacts of policies in specific regions or countries, as well as the effects of global policies on the world economy and the environment. This makes it a valuable tool for users who want to evaluate the likely outcomes of different policy choices before their actual implementation. The GEM-E3 model is capable  to analyze the interactions between the economy and the environment. It includes a module that captures the environmental impacts of economic activities, such as greenhouse gas emissions, air pollution, or land use changes. This allows users to evaluate the trade-offs between economic growth and environmental sustainability and to identify policies that achieve both goals.

Key features
Financial Sector, Technology diffusion,  Multiple Households, Endogenous labor skill supply, Unemployment, Bottom-up representation of the energy system, Soft Link with PRIMES model, Value Chains

Gem E3 Diagram 2

Climate module & emissions granularity
No climate module, emissions: CO2, CO2 process, CH4, N20,HFC,PFC,SF6,NF3

Socioeconomic dimensions
Welfare, income, consumption, labour force, unemployment

Mitigation/adaptation measures and technologies
1. Carbon Pricing & Market-Based Instruments
2. Energy Efficiency Improvements
3. Renewable Energy Deployment
4. Fossil Fuel Substitution & Fuel Switching
5. Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS)
6. Electrification & Sector Coupling
7. Behavioral & Structural Changes
8. International Cooperation & Climate Agreements

Economic rationale and model solution
Agents have myopic expectations. The model solves for equilibrium in each time period sequentially given the recursive dynamic nature.

Key parameters
For every country: GDP, consumption (per consumption purpose category), investments (by sector), exports  (by sector), imports  (by sector), government spending

Key policies that can be addressed
Economic and employment assessment of climate and energy policies, Energy taxation, CBAM, Carbon leakage, Evaluation of R&I portfolios

Use cases
Publication Reference	Abstract
L. Paroussos, A. Mandel, K. Fragkiadakis, P. Fragkos, J. Hinkel, Z. Vrontisi, 2019, “Climate clubs and the macro-economic benefits of international cooperation on climate policy”, Nature Climate Change. 
 
The Paris agreement has provided a new framework for climate policy. Complementary forms of international collaboration, such as climate clubs, are probably necessary to foster and mainstream the process of gradual and voluntary increase in nationally determined contributions. We provide a quantitative macro-economic assessment of the costs and benefits that would be associated with different climate club architectures. We find that the key benefits that could structure the club are enhanced technological diffusion and the provision of low-cost climate finance, which reduce investment costs and also enables developing countries to take full advantage of technological diffusion. Although they face the highest absolute mitigation cost, China and India are the largest relative winners from club participation because the burden faced by these countries to finance their energy transition can be massively reduced following their participation in the club.
L. Paroussos, K. Fragkiadakis, P. Fragkos, 2019, “Macro-economic analysis of green growth policies: the role of finance and technical progress in Italian green growth”, Climatic Change. 	The transition to a low-carbon economy is a complex process that, from a technical perspective, requires coordination of different market players, significant technology advancements and sufficient financial resources. The transition to a low-carbon energy system is a capital intensive process. Different technological options at different scales and different time frames will be required for the successful transition to a low-carbon energy system. The economic impact on countries that transform their energy system depends on a multitude of factors including their energy system profile, the access to low-cost financial resources, whether they are market leaders in the production of clean energy technology and their ability to assimilate knowledge that is produced elsewhere. In this study, we use a large scale applied CGE model to compute the macroeconomic implications of the investments required to reduce by 76% as compared to 1990 levels the GHG emissions of the Italian energy system within a context of global concerted GHG mitigation action. The focus of the analysis has been on the Italian economy and energy system as Italy is both an equipment manufacturer, its energy system is largely based on fossil fuels and its financial system is currently under pressure following the elevation of public debt and deficits. The model-based results suggest that the Italian economy can benefit from the low-carbon transition in the coming decades in case Italian firms and households have access to low-cost financial resources, Italian manufacturers acquire market shares in the production of clean energy technologies and technological progress is rapid driven by innovation and economies of scale. The average annual GDP growth of Italy in the period 2015–2050 can be 1.3% in the case that Italy reduces drastically its GHG emissions and the associated cumulative expenditures sum up to one trillion euro.
Fragkos, Panagiotis & Fragkiadakis, Kostas & Sovacool, Benjamin & Paroussos, Leonidas & Vrontisi, Zoi & Charalampidis, Ioannis, 2021. "Equity implications of climate policy: Assessing the social and distributional impacts of emission reduction targets in the European Union," Energy, Elsevier, vol. 237(C).DOI Badge	The implementation of determined or ambitious environmental policies may lead to regressive distributional impacts, disproportionately affecting low income population groups. The imposition of additional taxes on energy products affects negatively low-income households that face funding scarcity, increasing the risk of energy poverty. In this study, the state-of-the-art general equilibrium model GEM-E3-FIT is significantly expanded to represent ten income classes in all EU Member States. Each income class is differentiated by income sources, savings, and consumption patterns. We use the new modelling capabilities of GEM-E3-FIT to quantify the distributional impacts of European Union's ambitious emission reduction targets, in particular exploring their effects on income by skill and on energy-related expenditure by income class. The analysis shows that the transition to climate neutrality may increase modestly inequality across income classes, with low-income households facing the most negative effects. However, using carbon tax revenues as lump-sum transfers to support household income and as reduced social security contributions will increase employment and reduce income inequality across households in EU countries.
Fragkiadakis, K. et al., 2023. Fit for 55 climate package: Impact on EU employment by 2030, European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions, Eurofound. Ireland.DOI Badge	One of the core strategic objectives of the EU is to ensure that Europe becomes the first climate-neutral continent, with net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. To achieve this objective, EU policymakers adopted the Fit for 55 policy package in 2021, which contained more ambitious intermediate decarbonisation objectives aimed at reaching a 55% emission reduction target by 2030. In this report, we provide projections from a global macroeconomic model of how this complex policy package may affect the sectoral and occupational structure of employment in the EU by 2030, and the impacts across different regions and countries. A core finding is that the employment impacts of Fit for 55 are likely to be marginally positive at EU aggregate level but will vary across countries, regions and sectors based on their reliance on carbon-intensive industries on the one hand and their readiness to take advantage of greening opportunities on the other. 
Riahi, K., Bertram, C., Huppmann, D. et al. Cost and attainability of meeting stringent climate targets without overshoot. Nat. Clim. Chang. 11, 1063–1069 (2021). 	Global emissions scenarios play a critical role in the assessment of strategies to mitigate climate change. The current scenarios, however, are criticized because they feature strategies with pronounced overshoot of the global temperature goal, requiring a long-term repair phase to draw temperatures down again through net-negative emissions. Some impacts might not be reversible. Hence, we explore a new set of net-zero CO2 emissions scenarios with limited overshoot. We show that upfront investments are needed in the near term for limiting temperature overshoot but that these would bring long-term economic gains. Our study further identifies alternative configurations of net-zero CO2 emissions systems and the roles of different sectors and regions for balancing sources and sinks. Even without net-negative emissions, CO2 removal is important for accelerating near-term reductions and for providing an anthropogenic sink that can offset the residual emissions in sectors that are hard to abate.
World Bank. 2022. Supporting Serbia’s Transition to Greener and More Resilient Growth: Policy and Institutional Reforms. http://hdl.handle.net/10986/38271 	Serbia needs to transition to a greener growth model for internal and external reasons. Internally, Serbia’s economy is still characterized by low energy and resource productivity, with significant impacts on health and the environment. As a candidate country for EU membership, Serbia also needs to react to external influences by aligning domestic policies with the EU’s energy, environment, and climate legislation, while avoiding negative impacts of the EU’s planned Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM). This report draws from a rich analysis to provide recommendations on how the transition to greener and more resilient growth in Serbia can begin. First, environmental fiscal reforms are needed to incentivize the adoption of more environmentally friendly technologies. The implementation of carbon pricing will also enable Serbia to proactively prepare for the upcoming EU CBAM. The proceeds of carbon pricing should be reinvested in innovation and education to further accelerate the green transition. Second, institutional frameworks need to be strengthened to support the government in delivering on reforms. Third, sector-specific reforms will need to address important challenges like energy efficiency, air pollution, waste management, water, and wastewater. Importantly, the transition needs to be based on a coherent and adaptive roadmap, which mitigates the risks of 'brown' growth, protects those adversely impacted, and ensures an equitable distribution of the benefits of increased growth.
References
P. Capros, Leonidas Paroussos,  P. Karkatsoulis,  C. Fragkiadakis,  S. Tsani & I. Charalampidis, 2017. "GEM-E3 Model Documentation" 

L. Paroussos, A. Mandel, K. Fragkiadakis, P. Fragkos, J. Hinkel, Z. Vrontisi, 2019, “Climate clubs and the macro-economic benefits of international cooperation on climate policy”, Nature Climate Change. 

L. Paroussos, K. Fragkiadakis, P. Fragkos, 2019, “Macro-economic analysis of green growth policies: the role of finance and technical progress in Italian green growth”, Climatic Change. 

Vrontisi, Z., Fragkiadakis, K., Kannavou, M. et al. Energy system transition and macroeconomic impacts of a European decarbonization action towards a below 2 °C climate stabilization. Climatic Change 162, 1857–1875 (2020). 

Zoi Vrontisi, Ioannis Charalampidis, Leonidas Paroussos. What are the impacts of climate policies on trade? A quantified assessment of the Paris Agreement for the G20 economies. Energy Policy, Volume 139, 2020, 111376, ISSN 0301-4215.DOI Badge

P. Karkatsoulis, P. Siskos, L. Paroussos, P. Capros, (2016), "Simulating deep CO2 emission reduction in transport in a general equilibrium framework: The GEM-E3T model", Transportation Research, Part D

EC (2016), Commission staff working document impact assessment Accompanying the document Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2012/27/EU on Energy Efficiency SWD/2016/0405 final - 2016/0376 (COD)

P. Capros, L. Paroussos, I. Charalampidis, K. Fragkiadakis, P. Karkatsoulis, S. Tsani, (2016), "Assessment of the macroeconomic and sectoral effects of higher electricity and gas prices in the EU: A general equilibrium modeling approach", Energy Strategy Reviews, Volume 9, Pages 18-27, ISSN 2211-467X.DOI Badge

P.Karkatsoulis; P.Capros; P.Fragkos; L.Paroussos; S.Tsani, (2016) "First-Mover Advantages of the European Union's Climate Change Mitigation Strategy", International Journal of Energy Research.

Paroussos, L., Fragkos, P., Capros, P., Fragkiadakis, K.,(2014) "Assessment of carbon leakage through the industry channel: The EU Perspective", Technological Forecasting and Social
