Short overview
Human activities are causing major changes in biodiversity and ecosystems across the globe. Models are indispensable to quantify these changes and assess the effectiveness of measures to conserve and restore nature. The GLOBIO model is developed by PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency in collaboration with various partners and is designed to inform and support policy-makers by quantifying global human impacts on biodiversity and ecosystems. The model is tightly connected to PBL’s IMAGE model: an integrated assessment model that simulates the global environmental consequences of human activities. Over the past years, the IMAGE-GLOBIO framework has been extensively used for environmental assessments, for example for the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES).

GLOBIO covers multiple dimensions of nature
Biodiversity is commonly defined as the variety of life, which includes multiple aspects: diversity within species (genetic diversity), diversity between species and diversity of ecosystems. Thus, biodiversity is a multi-dimensional phenomenon, as are the benefits that people obtain from nature. GLOBIO therefore includes multiple complementary model components:

GLOBIO for assessing terrestrial biodiversity intactness
GLOBIO-Aquatic for assessing freshwater biodiversity intactness
GLOBIO-Species for assessing the distribution and abundance of vertebrate species
GLOBIO-ES for assessing various ecosystem services, including provisioning services, regulating services and cultural services
For an extended description of each of these components, see https://www.globio.info/what-is-globio

Key features
GLOBIO can be used to quantify various policy-relevant dimensions of human-nature interactions, including:

Benefits that people obtain from nature (ecosystem services, also called nature’s contributions to people or nature-based solutions)
Impacts of human activities on biodiversity and ecosystem services
Production- and consumption-based biodiversity impacts (‘footprints’)
Patterns and trends in biodiversity and ecosystem services under future socio-economic development scenarios
The effectiveness of large-scale policy options for conserving biodiversity and ecosystem services
Climate module & emissions granularity
Depending on the GLOBIO model component, climate change impacts are modelled either via global mean temperature increases, or monthly temperature and precipitation data.

Socioeconomic dimensions
Comes from the socio-economic development scenarios/linked IAM.

Mitigation/adaptation measures and technologies
Comes from the socio-economic development scenarios/linked IAM.

Economic rationale and model solution
Comes from the socio-economic development scenarios/linked IAM.

Key parameters
LU + CC maps

Key policies that can be addressed
See above for the key features.

Implications for SDGs
SDG14: GLOBIO derives patterns and trends in biodiversity and ecosystem services.

Use cases
Publication Reference	Abstract
Schipper AM, Hilbers JP, Meijer JR, et al. Projecting terrestrial biodiversity intactness with GLOBIO 4. Glob Change Biol. 2020; 26: 760–771.DOI Badge	Scenario-based biodiversity modelling is a powerful approach to evaluate how possible future socio-economic developments may affect biodiversity. Here, we evaluated the changes in terrestrial biodiversity intactness, expressed by the mean species abundance (MSA) metric, resulting from three of the shared socio-economic pathways (SSPs) combined with different levels of climate change (according to representative concentration pathways [RCPs]): a future oriented towards sustainability (SSP1xRCP2.6), a future determined by a politically divided world (SSP3xRCP6.0) and a future with continued global dependency on fossil fuels (SSP5xRCP8.5). To this end, we first updated the GLOBIO model, which now runs at a spatial resolution of 10 arc-seconds (~300 m), contains new modules for downscaling land use and for quantifying impacts of hunting in the tropics, and updated modules to quantify impacts of climate change, land use, habitat fragmentation and nitrogen pollution. We then used the updated model to project terrestrial biodiversity intactness from 2015 to 2050 as a function of land use and climate changes corresponding with the selected scenarios. We estimated a global area-weighted mean MSA of 0.56 for 2015. Biodiversity intactness declined in all three scenarios, yet the decline was smaller in the sustainability scenario (?0.02) than the regional rivalry and fossil-fuelled development scenarios (?0.06 and ?0.05 respectively). We further found considerable variation in projected biodiversity change among different world regions, with large future losses particularly for sub-Saharan Africa. In some scenario-region combinations, we projected future biodiversity recovery due to reduced demands for agricultural land, yet this recovery was counteracted by increased impacts of other pressures (notably climate change and road disturbance). Effective measures to halt or reverse the decline of terrestrial biodiversity should not only reduce land demand (e.g. by increasing agricultural productivity and dietary changes) but also focus on reducing or mitigating the impacts of other pressures.
Kok, M. T., Meijer, J. R., van Zeist, W. J., Hilbers, J. P., Immovilli, M., Janse, J. H., ... & Alkemade, R. (2023). Assessing ambitious nature conservation strategies in a below 2-degree and food-secure world. Biological Conservation, 284, 110068.DOI Badge	Global biodiversity is projected to further decline under a wide range of future socio-economic development pathways, even in sustainability-oriented scenarios. This raises the question how biodiversity can be put on a path to recovery, the core challenge for the implementation of the CBD Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework. We designed two ambitious global conservation strategies, ‘Half Earth’ (HE) and ‘Sharing the Planet’ (SP), and evaluated their ability to restore terrestrial and freshwater biodiversity and to provide nature's contributions to people (NCP), while also limiting global warming below 2 degrees and ensuring food security. We applied the integrated assessment framework IMAGE with the GLOBIO biodiversity model, using the ‘Middle of the Road’ Shared Socio-economic Pathway (SSP2) with its projected human population growth as baseline. We found that the HE strategy performs generally better for terrestrial biodiversity (biodiversity intactness (MSA), Area of Habitat, Living Planet Index, Red List Index) in currently still natural regions. The SP strategy yields more improvements for biodiversity in human-used areas, for freshwater biodiversity and for regulating NCP (pest control, pollination, erosion control, water quality). However, both strategies were insufficient to restore biodiversity and corresponded with considerable increases in food security risks and global temperature. Only when we combined the conservation strategies with a portfolio of ‘integrated sustainability measures’, including climate change mitigation and reductions of food waste and animal product consumption, our scenarios resulted in a restoration of biodiversity and NCP while keeping global warming below two degrees and food security risks below the baseline projection.
Lecl?re, D., Obersteiner, M., Barrett, M., Butchart, S. H., Chaudhary, A., De Palma, A., ... & Young, L. (2020). Bending the curve of terrestrial biodiversity needs an integrated strategy. Nature, 585(7826), 551-556. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-020-2705-y	Increased efforts are required to prevent further losses to terrestrial biodiversity and the ecosystem services that it  provides1,2. Ambitious targets have been proposed, such as reversing the declining trends in biodiversity3; however, just feeding the growing human population will make this a challenge4. Here we use an ensemble of land-use and biodiversity models to assess whether—and how—humanity can reverse the declines in terrestrial biodiversity caused by habitat conversion, which is a major threat to biodiversity5. We show that immediate efforts, consistent with the broader sustainability agenda but of unprecedented ambition and coordination, could enable the provision of food for the growing human population while reversing the global terrestrial biodiversity trends caused by habitat conversion. If we decide to increase the extent of land under conservation management, restore degraded land and generalize landscape-level conservation planning, biodiversity trends from habitat conversion could become positive by the mid-twenty-first century on average across models (confidence interval, 2042–2061), but this was not the case for all models. Food prices could increase and, on average across models, almost half (confidence interval, 34–50%) of the future biodiversity losses could not be avoided. However, additionally tackling the drivers of land-use change could avoid conflict with affordable food provision and reduces the environmental effects of the food-provision system. Through further sustainable intensification and trade, reduced food waste and more plant-based human diets, more than two thirds of future biodiversity losses are avoided and the biodiversity trends from habitat conversion are reversed by 2050 for almost all of the models. Although limiting further loss will remain challenging in several biodiversity-rich regions, and other threats—such as climate change—must be addressed to truly reverse the declines in biodiversity, our results show that ambitious conservation efforts and food system transformation are central to an effective post-2020 biodiversity strategy.
Barbarossa, V., Bosmans, J., Wanders, N., King, H., Bierkens, M. F., Huijbregts, M. A., & Schipper, A. M. (2021). Threats of global warming to the world’s freshwater fishes. Nature communications, 12(1), 1701. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-021-21655-w	Climate change poses a significant threat to global biodiversity, but freshwater fishes have been largely ignored in climate change assessments. Here, we assess threats of future flow and water temperature extremes to ~11,500 riverine fish species. In a 3.2?°C warmer world (no further emission cuts after current governments’ pledges for 2030), 36% of the species have over half of their present-day geographic range exposed to climatic extremes beyond current levels. Threats are largest in tropical and sub-arid regions and increases in maximum water temperature are more threatening than changes in flow extremes. In comparison, 9% of the species are projected to have more than half of their present-day geographic range threatened in a 2?°C warmer world, which further reduces to 4% of the species if warming is limited to 1.5?°C. Our results highlight the need to intensify (inter)national commitments to limit global warming if freshwater biodiversity is to be safeguarded.
Pereira, H. M., Martins, I. S., Rosa, I. M., Kim, H., Leadley, P., Popp, A., ... & Alkemade, R. (2024). Global trends and scenarios for terrestrial biodiversity and ecosystem services from 1900 to 2050. Science, 384(6694), 458-465.DOI Badge	Based on an extensive model intercomparison, we assessed trends in biodiversity and ecosystem services from historical reconstructions and future scenarios of land-use and climate change. During the 20th century, biodiversity declined globally by 2 to 11%, as estimated by a range of indicators. Provisioning ecosystem services increased several fold, and regulating services decreased moderately. Going forward, policies toward sustainability have the potential to slow biodiversity loss resulting from land-use change and the demand for provisioning services while reducing or reversing declines in regulating services. However, negative impacts on biodiversity due to climate change appear poised to increase, particularly in the higher-emissions scenarios. Our assessment identifies remaining modeling uncertainties but also robustly shows that renewed policy efforts are needed to meet the goals of the Convention on Biological Diversity.
