Short overview
The model is dvided into demands and supply, and allows for calculcatiing fuel consumption, CO2 emissions, total annual costs and a very detailed energy balance for the energy system. The demands are: heating, cooling, electricity, transport, industry and desalinatoin. The production units are to supply all these demands based on the principle of 100% renewable smart energy systems. This means it includes all energy grids, and also takes into account renewable energy supply in to all grids. This requires detailed modelling of P2X and storages. The user is able to determine simulatoin strategies and constraints for the energy system. This means, that the system for instance can run on a technical principal or on a market principal, just like different strategies for storages can be applied.

Key features of the EnergyPLAN model
Hourly modelling of the entire energy system in a year. Keeps track of storages, and makes sure that it can be used. Modelling of various types of renewable sources including VRES, biomass and biogas. Models P2X, both for heating, liquids and gas. Graphical user interface. Large modelling community on energyplan.eu. Models district heating at various levels. Models the links between electricity, heating, transport and industry.

Climate module & emissions granularity
It can model CO2 emissions. Based on detailed outputs on fuel consumption, the user can make their own calculations for various other emissions.

Socioeconomic dimensions
Calculate total annual costs based on fuel prices, investment costs, operatoin and maintenance costs and CO2 price. Is able to take into account taxces for various sectors, which will effect the market economic simulation. The theory is that these costs however does not show in the total societal annual costs.

Mitigation/adaptation measures and technologies
Technologies included for the various sectors.

Economic rationale and model solution
Can model technical based on reaching fuel efficient results, and can operate market based with the goal of lowering short term marginal costs.

Key parameters
Fuel, CO2, annual costs, utilisation of VRES

Key policies that can be addressed
Renewable energy systems. Cost and CO2 emissions impacts of various energy system designs. Smart energy systems

Model presentation
Video


Slides
Download slides in pdf

Recent use cases
Paper DOI	Paper Title	Key findings
DOI Badge	Transition pathways optimization methodology through EnergyPLAN software for long-term energy planning	EnergyPLAN in combinatoin with EplanOPT to find transition pathways towards renewable energy systems
DOI Badge	Smart energy cities in a 100% renewable energy context	How to set up principles for local energy planning utilising EnergyPLAN
DOI Badge	Implementing cleaner heating solutions towards a future low-carbon scenario in Ireland	Using EnergyPLAN to compute outputs from MARKAL/TIMES discussing heating scenarios for Ireland
Recent publications using the EnergyPLAN model
