Short overview
ATOM is an agent-based model, which based on the plausibility of its results compared to historical data and observations, simulates the expected effectiveness of various policy schemes on technology adoption (e.g., small-scale solar PV, battery energy storage systems, smart appliances, electric vehicles, etc.) in the residential sector, for the geographical and socioeconomic context under study. Apart from exploring the expected effectiveness of technology adoption under policy schemes of interest, the model allows us to consider and explicitly quantify the uncertainties that are related to agents’ preferences and decision-making criteria (i.e., behavioural uncertainty). As agents in the model, we refer to consumers/citizens and households.

More specifically, the novelty of ATOM compared to existing models lies in obtaining realistic uncertainty bounds and splitting the total model output uncertainty in its major contributing sources, based on a variance decomposition framework and an uncertainty characterisation method, while accounting for structural uncertainty. Thus, ATOM supports the definition of uncertainty ranges, considering the type (i.e., input, parametric, and structural) and the nature of uncertainty (i.e., epistemic or aleatory), and how uncertainty propagates to the model outcomes over the planning time horizon.

ATOM is part of the Technoeconomics of Energy Systems laboratory (TEESlab) Modelling (TEEM) suite.

Key features of the ATOM model
Variance decomposition takes place for all the three main modules of ATOM (i.e., calibration, sensitivity analysis, and scenario analysis). By allowing the user to select preliminary values for the agent-related parameters according to the plausibility of its results, based on historical data and observations (goodness-of-fit statistics), the model captures input uncertainty (i.e., calibration module). By deriving forward-looking simulations for different behavioural profiles (i.e., different set of agent-related parameters), from willing to invest to risk-averse consumers, ATOM captures parametric uncertainty (i.e., scenario analysis module). Both types of uncertainty are then propagated through the model, and their contribution to the total model’s output variance is quantified. The rest uncertainty is assumed to be explained by the model’s structure. Note that the uncertainty propagation for the agent-related parameters is done for each one of them, allowing calculation of the sensitivity of each parameter to the model output, in the context of a variance-based sensitivity analysis (Sobol method), and calculation of the relative contribution of the variance for each parameter to the total model output variance (i.e., sensitivity analysis module).

Climate module & emissions granularity
The model calculates CO2 emissions by the adoption of mitigation technologies in the residential sector, at the national scale, for the geographical and socioeconomic context under study.

Socioeconomic dimensions
Economic Growth (aspects of technology diffusion)

ATOM models the triggering of private investments, in the form of new capacity additions of different mitigation technologies, also capturing benefits and profitability aspects for households. Behavioural aspects relevant to the citizens'/households' decision-making criteria are also caputed by the model. Different socioeconomic data can be used to develop different citizen/household profiles.

Building sector growth

In ATOM, on-site energy generation and storage potential in the residential building sector is calculated, capturing also the potential socioeconomic benefits for households' self-consumption and energy autonomy.

Mitigation/adaptation measures and technologies
The model simulates the adoption of building-integrated/decentralised RES & storage technologies, energy-efficiency and adaptation measures and practices, as well as technologies and practices (e.g., demand-response, behavioural/lifestyle changes, etc.) that can increase demand-flexibility in the residential sector. It also investigates the achievement of capacity targets at the national level.

Economic rationale and model solution
The core principle of the model is that of agent-based modelling. In particular, each agent has a private initial belief about the expected annual cash inflows from investing a mitigation technology. This belief is expressed as a Gaussian distribution. Furthermore, to capture the effects of social learning, each agent receives information from the agents in its social circle that have already invested in the respective technology. This information concerns the actual profitability of their investments so far, and is used to update the agent’s beliefs. This is equivalent to updating a Gaussian prior, given a new observation. Accordingly, each agent has a social circle. This condition is modeled as a “small-world” network, which is a type of mathematical graph.

Key parameters
Weather data (e.g., site-specific solar irradiation dataset/site-specific ambient air temperature & wind speed, etc.): Country(Space)/Hourly(Time)
Historical data on technology adoption: Country(Space)/Daily-Monthly(Time)
Socioeconomic data: Country(Space)/Yearly(Time)
Electricity consumption profiles per household: Country(Space)/Hourly(Time)
Energy prices, competitive electricity consumption tariffs, and other regulated charges: Country(Space)/Yearly(Time)
Technological specifications: e.g., sizing of PV & storage systems, etc.
Policy specifications: e.g., net-metering policy scheme, feen-in-tariffs, etc.
Key policies that can be addressed
Energy

RES & storage: e.g., tax, subsidies, tariffs, etc.
Energy efficiency: e.g., energy mix target, efficiency target, regulations (thermal regulation in buildings, banning of diesel cars in urban areas, etc.), instruments under the EED and the EPBD, performance-based financing schemes, etc.
Implications for SDGs
§7: Affordable and clean energy by investigating:

Building-integrated/Decentralised RES generation
Self-consumption cost-benefit ratios
Projections on new solar PV capacity additions by households/citizens in a monthly resolution
On-site PV energy generation and consumption projections in the residential sector

§13: Climate action by investigating:

Adoption levels for technologies, as solar PV and storage systems, smart appliances, and electric vehicles, by households in the residential sector.

