Short overview
OSeMBE is a fully open source long-term electricity system model of the EU28 plus Norway and Switzerland. The power systems of the 30 countries included are individually modelled and connected by trans-border transmission lines. This allows country specific characteristics and trans-border electricity flows to be considered and their evolution within EU28+2 decarbonisation pathways assessed. The modelled period spans from 2015 to 2050. Each year is divided into five seasons. Each season is constituted by one representative day, which is divided into three parts. Therefore, in total each year consists of fifteen so called ‘time slices’.

Key features of the OSeMOSYS - OSeMBE model
Geographic coverage:

OSeMOSYS is completely Open-Source and allows the user to model the desired Reference Energy System at will. In particular the geographical coverage is depending on the system that is desired to observe, for the particular case of OSeMBE the EU28+CH+NO were modelled as nodes of the system. Every node is characterized by electricity demand, electricity generation technologies and electricity transmission links with neighbouring nodes.

Time resolution and horizon:

OSeMOSYS allows to define the time resolution of the model dividing the year in seasons, the seasons are characterized by says of the season and each day by parts of the day. In OSeMBE each year is divided into five seasons. Each season is constituted by one representative day, which is divided into three parts. Therefore, in total each year consists of fifteen so called ‘time slices’. The observation period is 2015 to 2050.

Technological Characterization:

16 different energy conversion technologies, 17 different energy carriers and 3 energy transfer and distribution infrastructures are modelled in OSeMBE

Climate module & emissions granularity
OSeMOSYS allows to model specific emissions per each technology operation, set emission penalties, annual limits on emissions and limits on emissions for model period.

Emissions can also be “exogenous” meaning not produced by the modelled technologies and be accounted for, in addition to the “endogenous” ones.

Socioeconomic dimensions
The Growth of the energy demand can be modelled according to different economic growth and social related trends evaluated outside the model boundaries

Mitigation/adaptation measures and technologies
The model allows to model all the existing technologies for energy conversion, from fossil fuels to new generation renewables. A switch from one technology to the other can be modelled thanks to emission targets, cost targets or technology use targets. In the same way is possible to evaluate the impact of national and international climate policies on the energy system.

Economic rationale and model solution
The core operating principle of OSeMOSYS is the Power and Energy balance, for every node, at system level and per each time slice.

The objective of the model is to estimate the lowest net present value (NPV) cost of an energy system to meet given demand(s) for energy or energy services.

Key parameters
Key Scenario assumptions for OSeMOSYS include: Energy Carriers Characterization (Fuels, Electricity, Heat), Energy Conversion Technologies Characterization (Capital Cost, Operative Costs, Efficiency, Emissions, Location, Lifetime) and Energy Demand of the modelled nodes.

Key Scenario results (outputs) consist in the matrix of installed and operating technologies every year to satisfy the energy demand, the costs of the scenario and of each technology and the overall emissions.

Policy questions and SDGs
Key policies that can be addressed
Policies that can be addressed can consist in:

Carbon Budget Policies
Carbon Pricing Policies
Technology Production Minimum or Maximum Policies
Technology Phase Out Policies
Implications for other SDGs
OSeMOSYS does not automatically calculate the implications on SDGs of its least-cost energy system to meet prescribed climate or emissions constraints. However, it is possible to use its outputs and calculate the predictions for certain indicators framed in the SDG agenda.

Recent use cases
 

Paper DOI	Paper Title	Key findings
10.1016/j.energy.2021.121973" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">DOI Badge10.1016/j.energy.2021.121973-blue">	The open source electricity Model Base for Europe - An engagement framework for open and transparent European energy modelling	This paper presents the Open-Source electricity Model Base for Europe, an electricity sector engagement model covering all member states of the EU, Norway, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. Built in OSeMOSYS and available on GitHub, the model allows dynamic power sector expansion analysis of the European power system till 2050. It provides a starting point into energy systems modelling and can be further developed in a collaborative manner. It enables non-experts to develop an understanding of energy systems models and energy planning. Thereby, it can serve as an engagement tool to carry the debate on the future of the European power system beyond the academy.
